System Repository and Publishers

Introduction: 

Linked images, and zones in particular, must keep certain packages
in sync with the global zone in order to be functional. The global zone will
constrain packages within the non-global zones and configure special publishers
in the non-global zone (NGZ). These publishers (henceforth called system
publishers) are special because the non-global zone cannot make certain kinds of
modifications to them. Among the forbidden operations for the non-global zone on
the system publishers are deleting, disabling, removing or replacing origins
provided by the system repository, and any other operations which might prevent
the solver from meeting the constraints imposed by the constraint package. The
global zone must provide the means for the non-global zone to configure itself
with system publishers by providing information like origins. The global zone
also has to provide a connection to the system publishers' repositories which is
available even in a scratch zone.


The Data path:

The pkg client in the NGZ uses the system repository in the global zone as a
proxy to the system publishers.  To ensure that a communication path between the
pkg client in the NGZ and the system repository in the global zone always
exists, the zone proxy client and the zone proxy daemon were created.

The zone proxy client runs in the NGZ. When started, it creates a socket which
listens on an inet port on 127.0.0.1 in the NGZ. It passes the file descriptor
for this socket to the zone proxy daemon in the global zone via a door call. The
zone proxy daemon listens for connections on the file descriptor. When zone
proxy daemon receives a connection, it proxies the connection to the system
depot.  The system depot is an Apache instance running in the global zone which
provides connectivity to and configuration of publishers.

The system depot acts as a proxy for the http and https repositories for
the publishers it provides.  When proxying to https repositories, it uses the
keys and certificates in the global zone to identify itself and verify the
server's identity.  It also provides a http interface to the file repositories
for the publishers it provides as well as serving publisher and image
configuration via the syspub/0 response.


Configuration:

The syspub/0 response is a p5s file.  The p5s file contains publisher
configuration and image configuration.  Currently, the only image configuration
it contains is the publisher search order for the provided publishers, but other
information may be added to the response as needed.  In addition to the basic
collection of publisher information, the p5s file also contains a list of urls
which the pkg client should proxy to via the system depot instead of contacting
them directly.  When creating a p5s file, the urls for origins and mirrors can
be transformed.  HTTPS urls are transformed to HTTP urls since the system depot
will be doing the SSL communication, not the pkg client.  File urls are
transformed into HTTP urls with a special format.  The urls contain the special
token "<sysrepo>" which the p5s parser knows to replace with the url of the zone
proxy client.  The rest of the url contains the prefix of the publisher, then
the sha1 hash of the global zone path to the file repository.

The information for the syspub/0 response comes from the global zone's image's
configuration.  The pkg/sysrepo service is responsible transforming the image
configuration into an Apache configuration file and causing the system depot to
reread its configuration.  The global zone pkg client restarts the pkg/sysrepo
servvice whenever the image's publisher configuration changes.
