.. CDDL HEADER START

.. The contents of this file are subject to the terms of the
   Common Development and Distribution License (the "License").
   You may not use this file except in compliance with the License.

.. You can obtain a copy of the license at usr/src/OPENSOLARIS.LICENSE
   or http://www.opensolaris.org/os/licensing.
   See the License for the specific language governing permissions
   and limitations under the License.

.. When distributing Covered Code, include this CDDL HEADER in each
   file and include the License file at usr/src/OPENSOLARIS.LICENSE.
   If applicable, add the following below this CDDL HEADER, with the
   fields enclosed by brackets "[]" replaced with your own identifying
   information: Portions Copyright [yyyy] [name of copyright owner]

.. CDDL HEADER END

.. Copyright (c) 2011, Oracle and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved.


Appendix 1
----------

Info.classification
...................

The following are defined values for the package attribute
info.classification with scheme org.opensolaris.category.2008, used by
the PackageManager GUI to display possible packages.  A typical entry
as used in a package manifest might be::

    set name=info.classification value=\
        "org.opensolaris.category.2008:System/Administration and Configuration"

Note that category and subcategory are separated by a "/"; 
as usual, spaces in the attribute value require quoting.

Defined values are:

Meta Packages
     Builds,Releases,Developer Tools,AMP Stack,Office Tools

Applications
     Accessories,Configuration and Preferences,Games,
     Graphics and Imaging,Internet,Office,Panels and Applets,
     Plug-ins and Run-times,Sound and Video,System Utilities,
     Universal Access

Desktop (GNOME)
     Documentation,File Managers,Libraries,Localizations,
     Scripts,Sessions,Theming,Trusted Extensions,
     Window Managers

Development
     C,C++,Databases,Distribution Tools,Editors,Fortran,
     GNOME and GTK+,GNU,High Performance Computing,
     Integrated Development Environments,Java,Objective C,
     Observability,Other Languages,PHP,Perl,Python,Ruby,
     Source Code Management,Suites,System,X11

Drivers
     Display,Media,Networking,Other Peripherals,Ports,Storage

System
     Administration and Configuration,Core,Databases,
     Enterprise Management,File System,Fonts,Hardware,
     Internationalization,Libraries,Localizations,Media,
     Multimedia Libraries,Packaging,Printing,Security,
     Services,Shells,Software Management,Text Tools,Trusted,
     Virtualization,X11

Web Services
     Application and Web Servers,Communications


