
	Chapter 10, Advanced IPS, deals with more complex package
	upgrade issues, and describe several features in IPS designed
	to simplify these problems.

For most upgrade operations, IPS will automatically do exactly what is
needed to install updated packages.  There are some cases, however,
that require that the developer provide additional information to IPS.
For performance reasons, the solver works purely on the dependency
information included in packages.  Packages whose dependencies indicate
that they may be installed at the same time but whose content conflicts
(attempts to install the same files, for example) will cause conflict
checking to fail pre-installation, requiring manual user specification 
of acceptable versions which would need to be determined by trial and
error.  Thus, making sure that conflicting packages cannot be installed
due to constraining dependencies is a responsibility of the package
developer.

Renaming, merging and splitting packages
----------------------------------------

Often, the desired breakdown of a software component changes, whether
because of original mistakes, change in the product or its usage over
time, or changes in the surrounding software environment.  Also,
sometimes just the name of a package needs to change. When
contemplating such changes, thought must be given to the customer who
is upgrading their system to insure that unintended side effects do
not occur.

We'll deal with the three cases in order of increasing delicacy.

First, simple renames are straightforward.  IPS provides a mechanism
to indicate that a package has been renamed.  A new version of the
package is published, containing a set action of the form:

set name=pkg.renamed value=true 

and a "require" dependency on the new package. Note that a renamed 
package may not deliver contents other than depend or set actions.

The new package MUST insure that it cannot be installed at the same
time as the original package before the rename.  If both packages are
covered by the same incorporation dependency, this is automatic... but
if not, the new package must contain an optional dependency on the old
package at the renamed version.  This insures that the solver will not
select both packages, which would fail conflict checking.

Anyone installing this renamed package will automatically receive the
new named package, since it is a dependency of the old version.  If a
renamed package is not depended upon by any other packages, it is
automatically removed from the system.  The presence of older software
may cause a number of renamed packages to be shown as installed; when
that older software is removed the renamed packages will be
automatically removed as well.  Packages may be renamed multiple times 
without ill effect other than user confusion.

Merging packages is straightforward as well.  There are two cases here;
in the first case, one package absorbs another at the renamed version.
For example, suppose package A@2 will absorb package B@3.  Simply 
rename package B to package A@2; remember to include an optional
dependency in A@2 on B@3 unless both packages are incorporated so
they upgrade in lockstep as above.  Now, a user upgrading B to B@3
will now get A installed, which has absorbed B.  The second case
is when both packages change their name; in this case, simply rename
both packages to the name of the new merged package, including of 
course two optional dependencies on the old packages in the new one
if they are not otherwise constrained.

Splitting packages into pieces is problematic at present if one of the
component pieces are not renamed.  This is because the package
post-split is not strictly speaking compatible with the package
pre-split, violating dependency logic that upgrading packages is the
safe thing to do.  As a result, we recommend that packages that need
to be split into multiple pieces have all different names for the
component pieces.  In this case, simple rename the original package,
including multiple require dependencies on the various pieces so that
anyone having a dependency on the original package will get all the
component pieces installed afterward.  Note that some components may
be absorbed into existing packages as a merge without problems.

Obsoleting packages
-------------------

Package obsoletion is the mechanism by which packages are emptied of
contents and are removed from the system.  Such a package does not
satisfy require dependencies, so a installed package w/ a 'require'
dependency on a package that becomes obsolete will prevent upgrade
unless a newer version of the installed package is available that does
not contain the 'require' dependency.

A package is made obsolete by publishing a new version with a set
action as follows:

set name=pkg.obsolete value=true

with no other contents save possibly for other set actions.

A package may be made non-obsolete by publishing newer versions;
note that users who upgraded through the obsoletion will lose
this package while those who did not will not.

Preserving editable files during package renaming or path changes
-----------------------------------------------------------------

One of the more frequent issues is the migration of editable files,
either in the filesystem or between packages.  IPS attempts to migrate
editable files that move between packages (say as the result of a
rename) and that are not renamed or otherwise have their path
altered. However, if the path changes the following must be done for
the user's customizations to be preserved:

If the file action in the old package does not contain the attribute
"original_name", it must be added.  Set the value to the original name
of the package, followed by a colon and then the path to the file
without a leading '/'. Once this is present on an editable file, it
must not be changed; this value acts as a unique identifier for all
moves going forward so that regardless of the number of versions
skipped on an upgrade, the user's content is properly preserved.

Moving unpackaged contents on directory removal/rename
---------------------------------------------------------

Normally, unpackaged contents are salvaged when the containing
directory is removed because the last reference to it disappears.
When a directory changes names, the packaging system treats this
as the removal of the old directory and the creation of a new one.
If the old directory has unpackaged content such as log files that
should be moved to the new directory, this may be done with the
salvage-from attribute if placed on the new directory.  For
example, suppose we wished to rename a directory from

/opt/mydata/log

to 

/opt/yourdata/log

In the same package version that eliminates the former and
introduces the latter, include 

salvage-from=opt/mydata/log

on the directory action that creates /opt/yourdata/log. Any 
unpackaged contents of any time will be migrated to the new location.

Delivering directories to be shared across boot environments
------------------------------------------------------------

In general IPS doesn't support delivery of packaged 
contents to datasets that span boot environments.  This is because
such shared contents if updated in one boot environment will not
meet the definitions for other boot environments.

However, some of the unpackaged files found under /var must be shared
across boot environments to preserve normal system operation in the
face of multiple boot environments.  Some examples include /var/mail,
/var/log and the like.  Customers are likely to place such data on
separate datasets as well, or on remote filers.  However, creating
per-directory datasets would mean that many datasets would be created
per-zone, which is not desirable.

As a result, the following mechanism has been devised to allow
multiple boot environments to cooperate on the management of the /var
namespace, while minimizing the number of datasets needed.


If it is desired to share a subdirectory of /var across boot
environments, it must be placed under /var/share.  However, the
packaging system cannot be used to deliver content to /var/share,
because it is not mounted when alternate boot environments are mounted
for modification.  To work around this restriction, a staging
directory is present in /var/.migrate.  During the fs-minimal boot
milestone which mounts /var, etc., any directories found under
/var/.migrate are copied into /var/share.  Thus, a package that wishes
to have a shared directory for mail would deliver a symbolic link from
var/mail pointing to var/share/mail, and a directory var/.migrate/mail
with the correct attributes.  Note that if this package needed to
support upgrade from /var/mail being a directory, it would set the
attribute salvage-from=var/mail on /var/.migrate/mail; the resulting
files would be copied as well and renamed so they are not migrated
again.

It is not possible or desirable to create symbolic or hard links 
in /var/share.





