
	Chapter 5

This chapter describes how the IPS client functions to install,
update and remove the software installed in an image. Understanding
basically how pkg(1) works will help administrators and developers
better understand the various errors that can occur, and allow
them to more quickly resolve package dependency problems.


The following steps are executed when pkg is invoked to modify
the software installed on the machine.

1) inputs are error checked.

2) a description of the desired end state of the system is
   constructed; in the case of an unconstrainted software update this
   might be something like "all the packages currently installed, or
   newer versions of them".  In the case of package removal, it would
   be "all the packages currently installed without this one".

3) the options are reviewed to make sure that at least one exists,
   and any missing dependencies, etc. of a package will mark that
   package as uninstallable.  If an obvious error exists, such
   as "I need to install A, but A depends on B, and no version of B
   is available", then pkg will print an appropriate error and exit.
   If no obvious errors are found, processing continues.

4) The various possible choices for all the packages are assigned
   boolean variables, and all the dependencies between those packages,
   any required packages, etc. are cast as boolean expressions in 
   conjunctive normal form.  The set of expressions thus generated 
   is passed to MiniSAT. If MiniSAT cannot find any solution, the
   error handling code attempts to walk the set of installed 
   packages and the attempted operation and print reasons for
   why each possible choice was eliminated.  If the curently installed
   set of packages meet the requirements but no other does, pkg will
   report that there is nothing to do.  Since the error message 
   generation and specificity is determined by the inputs to pkg,
   being as specific as possible in commands issued to pkg will
   produce the most useful error messages.  If on the other hand
   MiniSAT finds a possible solution, we begin optimization.

5) The optimization phase is necessary because there is no way of
   describing some solutions as more desirable than others to a SAT
   solver. Instead, once a solution is found we add additional
   constraints to the problem to "fence off" less desirable choices,
   and we fence off the current solution as well.  We then repeatedly
   invoke MiniSAT and repeat the above operation until no more
   solutions are found; the last successful solution is taken as the
   best one.  Clearly, the difficulty of finding a solution is
   proportional to the number of possible solutions; being more
   specific about the desired result will produce solutions
   more quickly.

6) Once the set of package FMRIs that best satisfy the posed
   problem is found, the evaluation phase begins.  In this
   phase, we compare the packages currently installed on the
   system with the end state, and compare package manifests
   of old and new packages to determine three principle lists:

   * actions that are being removed
   * actions that are being added
   * actions that are being updated

   The action lists are then updated so that:

   * directory and link actions are reference counted mediated link
   * processing is done hardlinks are marked for repair if their
   * target file is updated; this is becaus updating a target of a
     hardlink in a manner that is safe for currently executing
     processes breaks the hard links.
   * editable files moving between packages are correctly handled
     so any user edits are not lost.
   * The action lists are sorted so that removals, additions and 
     updates occur in the correct order.
 
   All the currently installed packages are then cross-checked to
   make sure that no packages conflict - two packages do not attempt
   to deliver a file to the same location, directory attributes
   for the same directory agree between packagts, etc.  If conflicts
   exist, these are reported and pkg exits with an error message.

   Finally, the action lists are scanned to determine if any
   SMF services need to be restarted if this operation is performed,
   whether or not this change can be applied to a running system,
   whether or not the boot archive needs to be rebuilt afterward,
   amount of space required, etc.

7) If pkg is running without the -n flag, processing continues
   to the download phase.  For each action that requires content,
   we download any required files by hash and cache them.  This
   step may take some time if the amount of content to be 
   retrieved is large.  Once donwloading is complete, if the
   change is to be applied to a live system (image is rooted
   at '/') and a reboot is required, the running system is 
   cloned and the target image is switched to the clone.

8) Execution begins with all the removal actions being executed.  If
   any unexpected content is found in directories being removed from
   the system, that content is placed in lost+found under /var/pkg.
   Execution proceeds to install and update actions.  Note that all
   the actions have been blended across all packages; thus all the
   changes in a single pkg operation are applied to the system at once
   rather than pkg by pkg; this permits packages to depend on each
   other, exchange content, etc safely.  For details on how files
   are updated, see the description of the file action in chapter 3.


10)If we're updating a live system, any pending actuators are executed
   at this point.  These are typicall SMF service restarts/refreshes.
   Once these are launched, we update the local search indicies. 
   Lastly, if neede, we update the boot archive.


 



 
