
Packaging and Delivering Software with the Image Packaging System

                       A developer's guide


Preface
-------


	In Solaris 11 and onwards, system software is packaged with
	the Image Packaging System, or IPS.  IPS takes care of
	installing new software and upgrading that software.  This
	manual is for engineers and advanced administrators who wish
	to better understand IPS, how to use it to package their own
	software, and wish to understand how Solaris is packaged w/
	IPS.  Special attention is given to the underlying design
	concepts and design patterns so that readers can more readily
	understand and utilize the more advanced features of IPS.

How this book is organized:
---------------------------

	Chapter 1 - IPS Design Goals & Patterns, outlines the basic
	design philosopy of IPS and its expression as software
	patterns.

	Chapter 2 - Package lifecycle, provides an overview of the
        software package lifecycle with IPS.

	Chapter 3 - IPS Core Concepts, lays out the basic terminology
	and describes the various components that form IPS.

	Chapter 4 - Creating simple packages with IPS, gets
	the new user started constructing their own packages.

	Chapter 5 - Basic operation of pkg(1).

	Chapter 6 - Dependencies, explains the different types of IPS
	dependencies and how they can be used to construct working
	software systems.

	Chapter 7 - Handling variations, explains how variants, facets
	and mediated links are used to allow software publisher to
	define multiple installation forms for their packages.

	Chapter 8 - Transmogrifications, explains how package manifests
	can be machine edited to permit the automated annotation and
	checking of package manifests.

	Chapter 9 - Using SMF to generate side effects, explains how to
	use the Service Management Framework to automatically handle
	any necessary side effects of package installation.

	Chapter 10, Advanced Upgrade, deals with more complex package
	upgrade issues, and describe several features in IPS designed
	to simplify these problems.

	Chapter 11, Package Signing, explains how package signing works
	and how developers and QA organizations can sign either new
	or existing, already signed packages.

	Chapter 12, Dealing with Zones, describes how IPS handles zones
	and discusses those cases where package developers should be
	aware of zones.

	Chapter 13, Solaris and IPS, describes how Oracle use IPS to
	package Solaris, and how the various dependency types are used
	to define working package sets for Solaris.

	Chapter 14, Package Republication, describes how administrators
	can modify existing packages if needed for local conditions.

        Appendix 1: info.classification scheme definitions.

